The next couple of weeks I would like to look at this idea of grace.
Of grace
And because we are a united Methodist who have a Wesleyan focus,
And for those who may not know, John Wesleyan as brother Charles,
founded the united well the methodist movement they started in small groups
I'm very focused on studying the Bible and
and as the community began to know this and the ministry began to become more popular.
they would call them bible thumpers or methodists to be mean right
And the Methodist part of that stuck.
and through the years we have been called different things as far as the church.
But now we are called the United Methodist.
church and so anyway because we have a wesleyan focus because the wesley brothers i would like to help you have a better understanding of john's
ons concepts.
Of God's grace.
And to be honest with you, one of the primary reasons why I am a United Methodist pastor is because of John Wesley's understanding of personal holiness,
and social holiness. Anybody ever heard of those two terms before?
Personal holiness and social holiness.
there's a fairly wide range of different types of churches on one end of the spectrum there are churches that primarily speak of personal salvation
Salvation and a person's relationship with God through Jesus Christ.
So that's one end of the spectrum. On the other end of the spectrum, there are churches that totally focus on social holiness, work
working with the poor, feeding the hungry, etc. And in this case, you may attend worship and rarely hear of accepting Jesus Christ as your Lord and Savior.
And so those are the two extremes of this spectrum.
that I am speaking of.
Today.
But John Wesley put personal holiness -
And social holiness
Together.
And that's one thing I love about the United Methodist Church, at least the way they understand Scripture, and that it is a
Both and.
and not an either or situation. Does that make sense?
So God is the one who acts
And because of what God has done for us, we offer our lives back to God through a life of service.
Let's say that together.
God is the one who acts
And because of what God has done for us,
we offer our lives back to God
Through a life of service.
Does that make sense to everyone?
so um as we continue to think about that wesley brought out a distinctive emphasis.
And the early Methodists, in particular, were concerned about inviting people to experience God's grace
and to grow in their knowledge and love of God through disciplined Christian
living.
Well as you know in our society today discipline of any form is pretty much flown out the window right but in in this day and i and i hope in the day
Open the days to come for us today.
this idea of disciplined christian living will spark new life.
They place primary emphasis on this idea of Christian living, on putting
faith and love into action.
And this emphasis on what Wesley referred to as practical divinity is still a trademark.
of United Methodism today.
The distinguishing shape of our theological heritage now what's theology again
O-l-o-g-y is always what?
The study of and in our case, T.H.E.O. Thao is
god so we're talking about in theology we're talking about the study of god and so the distinguishing shape of our theological heritage in other words the history of beliefs of the united methods
Methodist Church can be seen not only in this emphasis on Christian living,
but also in Wesley's distinctive understanding of God's saving grace.
although wesley shared with many other christians a belief in salvation, personal salvation by grace.
He combined them with a powerful way to create distinctive emphases for living a full,
Christian life. And so, as we talk about this, we're talking about the overarching sense of God's grace.
And Wesley broke that down into three particular kinds of grace. Now, does...
you know, you know,
God does not have
Probably.
I mean, I...
From our studies, he just is graceful, right? A graceful God. But for us to understand that
better, Wesley broke it down into three
different types of grace and that's what we're going to be talking about over the next couple weeks the first is prevenient grace
Some of you Methodists may find these terms familiar.
The second is justifying grace.
And the third is sanctifying grace.
And so grace is central to our understanding of Christian faith
and life.
Grace can be defined as the love and mercy given to us by God because God wants us to be
To have it.
So many times we as Christian people, even though we believe in Jesus Christ so many times, we tend to think of God as being a judgmental.
mental.
An angry parent type God, right?
I've thought of that at times in my life.
Right?
and this is not the type of God that we understand after Christ.
For God to be.
God really wants us to have
His grace.
His love, his mercy, his forgiveness.
Not because of anything that we have done to earn it, which is the amazing thing and a hard concept for us human beings to understand, right?
You get the first starting five of the basketball team because you work your air end off, right?
Right?
Everything in life
Everything in life that we do
at least that i've experienced to have success in it.
You have to work hard at it. Amen.
And that is why it is so hard for us to understand this idea of grace.
from God because there is no work
To be done.
God, through Christ, has already done the work.
Can we kind of begin there and maybe work through that a little bit?
All right.
So, um,
In Ephesians, it says, for by grace...
You have been saved through faith.
And this is not your own doing.
It is,
The gift of God.
Not a gift.
It is.
The gift.
Right?
of God, not the result of works so that no one may boast.
Not the result of work so that no one
May boast our United Methodist heritage is rooted in a deep and profound understanding of God's grace.
This incredible grace
It flows from God's great love for us.
You remember John 3:16?
If you remember, let's say it together, right?
For God so loved the world
That he gave his only son,
So that everyone who believes in him
will not perish,
But have eternal life.
Now, why do you think the church has raised that up to a point where most of us who've been around for very long, and maybe some of us who aren't even Christians know what John 3:16.
16.
yes.
This one verse summarizes the entire gospel.
The ability to call to mind God's love
And God's gift of Jesus Christ is a rich,
resource for our theology and faith.
as you know john wesley the founder of the methodist movement described again these three different types of grace or within god's grace different maybe ah time frames.
of how we experience God's grace. The first is prevenient grace.
The second is justifying grace.
and the third is sanctifying grace. And today,
I just want to quickly
Uh,
Glanced over these and we'll get into them
Deeper next week.
With prevenient grace, Wesley understood
that understood grace as God's active presence
In our lives.
Now, whenever we think of the prefix, P-R-E, in English,
What do we normally think of? What does that mean?
Comes before, right?
Pre-venient grace. And so this idea of pre-venient grace,
Is before.
So we have come to our knees in repentance before we have repentance.
believed upon Jesus Christ as God's son.
And our savior
It's before we believe that Jesus died for us on the cross and that God raised him.
From
The dead. Prevenient grace is that burning fire within us to learn more. That emptiness that so many of us try to fill with the wrong.
Long thing when all we're really searching for is God. Amen.
It's prevenient grace is not present or not dependent.
on human actions or human response it is a gift, a gift that is always available but that can be
Refused.
wesley understood prevenient grace to be god's grace that stirs up within us a desire to know god right it empowers us to respond to god's invitation to be.
To be in relationship with God. And you might be saying, well wait, that's kind of messed up. Why would that be? But remember, everything starts with God's relationship.
Grace, the gift, right?
And so we can't even respond
Until God
has allowed us to respond through breathing in grace. Does that make sense?
right we we can't even we don't even know how to respond or even an interest in responding until we have experienced God's
Prevenience, what Wesley calls prevenience grace.
God's grace enables us to discern differences between good and evil. It makes it possible for us to choose good. God takes the initiative in relating to
to humanity.
We don't have to beg for this gift, right? We don't have to beg and plead for God's love and God's grace. God actively seeks us. We should get an amen for that.
And for that,
So many times we think of God as, oh yeah, well, that's interesting, but think about it like this. He is God.
The creator
Of all that is.
He is the creator of everything that has come before, everything that will ever come again. He is the creator of this moment. He is the creator of you. He knew you.
You before you were even born.
If you've always been told,
That you were an accident.
You weren't meant to happen.
God is saying, oh no.
I had plans for you since your conception.
God knows every word on your tongue.
Before you speak it
Does he like every word on your tongue before you speak it?
I know he didn't like all of the words on my tongue.
Before I speak on that.
So that's prevenient grace.
Prevenient grace, God's active presence.
In our lives.
And I just want to give you a teaser about justifying grace.
justifying grace paul wrote to the church in corinth.
In Christ,
God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting their trespasses against them.
In Christ, God was reconciling
The world to himself,
Not counting their trespasses.
Against them and again
What does the...
prefix RE usually mean
When we say redo, what does that mean?
Right?
So, so, so, so, so,
Do you hear the hint in the scripture that there once was a man who was
Was a relationship with god
Right?
And now, for some reason,
God has to
Reconcile
Us back to him.
You hear that?
Now, it doesn't get into all that, but just that one word tells us, in Christ, God was reconciling the world. Something happened that we, the relationship,
Relationship fell apart
And now God is reconciling us back to himself.
And also in his letter to the Roman Christians, Paul wrote:
but god proves his love for us and that while we still were sinners christ.
Died,
For us,
How many times
Would you give your life,
To your worst enemy.
How many times would you lay your life down,
For someone that you absolutely despise.
But God proves his love for us that while we were still sinners,
Christ.
Died.
For us.
These verses show us this idea of justifying grace.
Justifying grace.
Of our pardon and restoration.
And through the work of god in christ
Our sins are forgiven.
Our relationship with God is restored.
and for john wesley the image of god which has been distorted by sin that relationship that's broken right.
is renewed within and through Christ's death.
All right, so today we've talked about this idea of grace. We've talked about prevenient grace and what does PRE mean again?
It comes before, and so with prevenient grace, what is it that we're talking about? It comes before prevenient grace.
salvation yes so prevenient grace comes before salvation it is a gift of god it is nothing that we have done at all amen
As a matter of fact, it is because of what Wesley would call "prevenient grace" or God's grace that we even respond and have
a willingness to respond and possibly accept Christ as our Lord and Savior, right? That's what prevenience, grace, and
Is.
And then as we come closer, justifying grace is that moment.
Right?
that moment and we'll get into it more but that moment when whether it's metaphorically or literally or both
I guess it would need to be both so it could either be you could come to your knees and your heart
Right. I suppose we could come to our knees.
Physically and not really mean it in our heart
Couldn't we?
Right? Right? And a lot of us do that, right? But whenever you come to your knees in your heart or you do that and you show that physically by coming to your knees before
He's before God and asking for forgiveness.
God reconciles us to him.
Through Jesus Christ. And that is what...
Wesley would call.
Justifying.
grace folks i i know a lot of this is is kinda thick maybe you might think but this is a primary um um belief in all churches.
God's grace
Whenever you're believing in Jesus Christ and what God has done through Jesus Christ, it doesn't matter what church,
You go to
I mean, there are different ways that they emphasize it, right?
but um everyone needs to understand god's grace.
Because
Although we have a need to respond,
And because of the grace given to us,
We will respond when we respond.
Truly experience that grace
Right?
This is the way that John Wesley
I understood, I just made it simplified, you might say, with the prevenient grace of
Justifying grace and then sanctifying grace as the life after
What?
Salvation,
So you have the life before salvation.
Brevini grace you have justifying grace which is the moment of
Salvation and you have sanctifying grace
Um, yeah.
And we'll move on to talk about this idea of perfection.
Right?
Wesleyan idea of perfection and it's simply loving God and loving neighbor
So I hope this will maybe wet your whistle, so to speak, as my dad used to say.
about what might be coming next week because these are very important topics about God's grace.
In our life.
and the way that we can respond to them. Amen?
Let's pray. Dear God, thank you so much for your amazing gifts in our life.
Thank you so much for what Jesus has done for us, what you have done through Christ.
In our life, help us, Lord, to respond to you.
and if we haven't god accepted you as our lord and savior through jesus we just ask god that you would fill us full.
Of your spirit that even if now is not the right time that you would plant in us a seed
To open the door.
To your grace
To your forgiveness
To your reconciliation lord
We love you so much.
And it's in Jesus' name that we pray. Amen
Amen.